Let's turn to your retirement then. I was
wondering, you retired from the military because
of your thirty years. Thirty years service,
that's right. And so there was no chance of staying
on then? The only chance of staying on was getting
in a promotion spot, being the division
commander, and General Rutter and I are the same
age and he was in it. had no reason to retire. And the
only way he had to get another star, then. He had a
second star. Yeah, but I mean, for you. And the only
way for me to get a second star would be get into his
job, or similar jobs somewhere in the United
States. And of course, they keep that within an
Army area. Yeah. So there was no place for me. And I
got what they call a statutory requirement. It's
30 years, period. Yeah. I was BG for seven years,
permanent rank, and it was pretty good. Now, how
did you feel on the day you retired? Well, I felt
with mixed emotions. I had to have mixed emotions.
I was leaving something that I had nurtured from
something that was mediocre to something that was
superior. And I built it up. I could see myself
accomplishing something. And I had that
tremendous satisfaction in knowing that I had
accomplished something. On the other hand, I've
known the regulations for 30 years or more. And
you're facing it. Yeah. Nothing you can do about
it. Nothing you can do about it except conform.
It's the law of the land. It's the Army
regulations, so to speak, ARs. And the only way I
could have stayed on was by being promoted. And
there was no spot for it. Of course, you had a lot to
look forward to in the civilian world, too. You
bet. I had a going business that I carried forward.
I was deeply engrossed with it, very active. A lot
of people said Brunt Company was a one-man show, so
to speak.
It wasn't a one-man show, but it was one-man
direction.
It was my money, and I was looking after it. That's
another way of putting it. I was making it
appreciated by virtue of working and making it
earn me money.
If you have to, well, let's do this. When we take a
look at your, over your 30 years now, I'd like to
know what things in the military over those three
decades stand out as what you'd call your
achievements and what things stand out as oh maybe
shortcomings you just couldn't finish something
or get something obviously a general doesn't have
very many failures but I mean just something that
you couldn't accomplish
In the Army, I don't know of anything that I'd set
out to do that I didn't accomplish.
In combat and all my Army work, up until I got in the
9th Divardy, I accomplished what I wanted. In the
little picture, meaning I did a superior job and I
traded for it and that's that. In the 90th Divardy,
I set my goals of being combat proficient for the
Divardy, meaning all of its parts. And like I say,
it was a five-year program. I didn't start on it.
and set my sights and my direction until the second
year, in the second year. So it was a five-year
program, and I accomplished it on the fifth year.
In total, I accomplished it with two battalions
first, and then the three battalions, and then the
fourth battalion. So you'd probably consider
that your finest achievement? I consider that I
left out division artillery, combat proficient,
period. And that's all any commander can ask for.
Sure.
I turn it over to my successor. I turn it over back to
General Rutter. General, your division
artillery is combat proficient. It's passed its
test on the critical army eyes, and there's
nothing more I can say about it. That's all I had to
say. That's right. That's all I had to say. I
enjoyed working for you, and I'll see you next
football game maybe. Something like that. He and I
used to go to a lot of football games together.
Let's talk about General Rutter because it was
during his years that there were so many changes at
A&M that I want to get your opinion on, but first
let's talk about Earl Rutter.
Earl Rutter was a salt of the earth. No question
about it. He came from, I don't know whether you
know where Eden is or not. No, I don't. He was born
out in Eden, out in Concho County, which you know
where San Angelo is. Well, San Angelo is up in that
part of the county and Eden is down in this part of
the county. And it's ranching country, goat
ranches, sheep ranches, some cattle. But he went
to school there, grammar school and high school,
probably a one-room school, if you knew the truth
of it. It's a very small town. It's just a big
crossroads with a couple of truck stops and a
general mercantile store and a drug store and a
couple of cafes. One nice cafe and one coffee shop.
It's terrible. I built three jobs in that county.
So I've been to all the truck stops there.
I guess there's maybe 300-400 people living,
eating proper, and of course the ranchers and all
that. What kind of man was Rudder? They said he's
the salt of the earth. He's the salt of the earth,
that's right. He's, well, to start with, he's a
rancher boy. And all he knows is hard work and
honesty and being a good fellow. He went up to John
Tarleton, from high school. And one of the
ranchers gave him a milk cow when he went up there.
And he took this damn cow up there and sold milk to
get through college. And of course, John Tarleton
then was a junior college. and he played football
up there and got a football scholarship to go to A&M
and so he went down there and finished his Union
senior year at A&M. That happened in 1932. He was
down in the infantry and I was in the artillery so I
would pass one another, knew one another, but not
eminently.
He was a very capable person, business-wise.
After he got out of the Army in 1945 or 6, whenever he
got out, I don't know, he went back to Brady, which
is a county seat just below Eden in McCulloch
County.
bought into or bought a
royal tire store, combination appliance store
and filling station and you know, sold all kinds of
refrigerators and tires and stoves and that type
of store and had a couple gasoline pumps out front.
Basically a tire and appliance store.
on his U.S. Royal. And he participated in civic
enterprises and elected mayor over there.
And
did a good job as mayor of Brady and was very civic
minded and
They had a scandal down in the Texas Land Board,
Land Commissioner had this program of
veteran benefits and that they would help you buy a
farm or a ranch up to 10 acres or $7,500 I think was
the maximum at that time anyway. And they caught
one of the then I want to say Baskin-Giles. I don't
know whether that was that fellow's name or not.
Anyway, they caught him buying up property and
then selling it to this program. And as soon as they
did, why, they tried him and convicted him. And of
course, that relieved him of his land
commissioner's job. And the governor appointed
the mayor of Brady, which is Earl Rudder, land
commissioner. And Earl went down there and
straightened it out and established certain
protective
steps to going through this process that
eliminated that possibility anymore.
He set it up at the county judge in your particular
area, and maybe the county auditor and somebody
else set it on a land board.
to where they had to prove the value of the land
before the veterans' loan people down there, the
land commissioner, would even accept the
application. Well, that put the monkey on the
county judge's back and the county comptroller or
the county treasurer, whatever they got. And one
other person, I forget. Somebody that was
supposed to be of integrity in the county. And I
eliminated that. that possibility of fraud or
conspiracy to defraud the government or the
commission.
And then the next thing you know, he realized that
they were out of money and they only had made, let's
say, 10,000 loans. And here's a million.
ex-servicemen wanting them. So he sponsored a
constitutional amendment of changing the law to
where they would allocate or authorize another
$200 million investment in it. I passed
73.
That rocked along and it was so successful they
passed a second amendment, increasing it again to
maybe another $200,000, $300,000. It was so
successful of helping a man buy a piece of land. And
that set him up to where he was heir apparent and
theoretically set up to run for the governorship.
And I used to visit with him. I was his devotee
during those years. And I'd go down there, or we'd
go to summer camp together. I'd be in Austin to the
highway landings, and I'd go up and talk with him.
He'd come to Dallas, and he'd come out the house.
And we'd proper feet up on the cocktail table and
have a drink and eat peanuts and talk about
problems that he was having. He talked to me about
running for governor, and about that time,
the presidency of A&M became vacant. Did the
general want to run for governor? Was he that
inclined? Well, he was that inclined, yes. On the
other hand, he said, Graber, where am I going to get
a million dollars? And it cost a million dollars to
run a statewide race. And I said, well, Earl, I
don't know. But I'll give you more on my share. All
he could do was thank me. But he says, I'm just
dumbfounded. I don't know where to start raising
that kind of money without incurring some
obligation. And I'm not going to be obligated to
anybody if I run for governor. Anyway, about that
time, the presidency for A&M opened up, and I
forget why it opened up,
but it did. And he talked to me about that. What did
he say about that? He asked me what I thought about
it. I remember these words, and he reminded me of
this, probably the next to last time I ever saw him.
My words were that, Earl, you can do more good for
the state of Texas as president of Texas A&M than
you ever could as governor. Because a governor has
certain political obligations, and you are
building men over at A&M to run our state. And your
impact on the student body over there will turn out
such high caliber men that go to every crossroad in
this damn state where your efforts as governor
down there, you jockeying political patronage
and deals with the legislature and you know those
sorry bastards. You're dealing with the
lobbyists here and you're dealing with everybody
and you're in the middle all the time. How do you
respond? Well, he took the job as president of A&M.
Well, what did he think as far as your advice? Of
course, he said, I didn't know about that when I
told him that he could make more impact on the state
of Texas as president of A&M than he ever could
think about as governor. I don't know. You didn't
know him, but he kind of snickered and said, I don't
know about that.
But he reminded me that I told him that. Oh, the last
two or three times I saw him, one of those two, the
last two or three, he died very suddenly, and
that was that. But he was the salt of the earth.
There was no bad, and it was all good in him. Because
I knew him, and I knew him as a soldier. I knew him in
combat in Europe. Did you know him in combat? Oh,
gosh, yeah. What rank was he when after the war? I
mean as soon as the war was over? Well he was
lieutenant colonel and then he made colonel.
About the same time you did? Yeah about the same
time I did. He was he was lieutenant colonel
commanding his second range of battalion in
Europe which is fighting a bunch of fighting SOBs.
They had that reputation and I'll show you his
reputation. They were, he personally was the
first man up the cliffs in Omaha Beach. And General
Bradley wrote him up in his book, I don't know
whether you've read it or not, of where he
chastised Earl for going up there. He was a
commander. He was supposed to see if the job was
done, not go up there and do it himself. And Earl
told him that the only way he knew that the job was
going to be done was to be up there and see if it was
done. And they went in and neutralized these shore
defenses. Some particular cannons they had up
there, they had to neutralize to keep them firing
on our people coming in, all that kind of thing.
I went to see him one time in Europe, and I was
so mad at him I won't kill him. He
came in to the, we were in the Roar Valley, waiting
for the American troops to capture the Roar Dam.
Otherwise, if we'd have started across there,
they could open the dam up and wash us out. Sure. And
we were up there for a week or more and
I forget the number of the division, but they gave
some division this responsibility, and they
tried at night, and they tried at daytime. They
couldn't do it. The Germans just beat them back.
That's all they stood. And somebody suggested
about the Rangers. Turned over to the Rangers, let
them go do it. And Earl was, his battalion was
nominated to do it. by the command of the Ranger
Force. And I don't know who that was. I don't know
who they were responsible to. There was a special
task force that was set up for specialized jobs,
and I guess all the way back in the War Department in
Washington. But anyway, they gave that mission to
the 2nd Ranger Battalion.
beefed him up, gave him a bunch of help, and he went
in there and did it in one night, captured and
intact. And that left a bunch of the, our Corps, we
were in the 19th Corps of the 9th Army, and that let
our Corps go on across the valley, because they,
with the Americans in control of the gates and all,
they couldn't wash us out. Well anyway, word
circulated around through all our soldiers, I had
a fighting son of a bitch. There was a fighting
outfit. And one of my six strippers, my operations
sergeant, who was a hell of a fine man, came in to me
three or four days later. He says, Colonel, I want a
bus, and I want to leave the outfit. Of course, that
floored me, because he was my right-hand
operations sergeant. What the hell are you
talking about, sergeant? You been drinking or
something? No, sir. I want to join the 2nd Ranger
Battalion. Why do you want to do that? Because
they're fighting some bitches, and they got a
colonel down there that's out in front of them. And
I want to go down there and fight with them. Well, a
man tell you that, you can't say, no, I won't
approve your transfer. And Earl wouldn't take him
as anything but a private, because he didn't want
to upset his esprit among his own people. So this
boy took a bus from Sixth Stryper to one striper to
join the 2nd Ranger Battalion. Because of his
admiration for Colonel Rutter. And of course, I
was only looking for Earl Rutter. I'd known him in
school and I'd known him since then. What the hell
is he doing proselyting my people like that? But,
uh... What did he say? Oh, he just laughed at me and
said, oh, get off my back. Come on, let's have a cup
of coffee and a donut. I got some hot donuts down
here. And he said, that man came to me, and I guess
it's true, that man came to me and wanted to join my
battalion. And I told him, hell, I couldn't take
6th Striper. He said, well, I'll take the bus if
you'll take me. And when my operations sergeant
told him that, he said, well, you go get
transferred then. I'll prove it when you come over
here. And I mean, what can you do with a man that you
depend on and has that capabilities to the Army?
And he thought so well of Colonel Rutter that he
would take a bus from Six Stripe to One Stripe to get
to serve under you. That's incredible. That's
right. But that's Earl Rutter. Let's talk about
the changes. That, to me, is the salt of the earth.
Yeah. I never had anybody come and tell me they'd
take a bus to come in my outfit. But that old boy did.
Let's talk about the changes during the Rudder
presidency, because they were fundamental
changes, revolutionary changes to Texas A&M.
First, we allowed women, and then we allowed
blacks, and then all at the same time pretty much,
then the end of the Mandatory Corps, and
eventually this institution grows from 6,000 in
1960 to 34,000 today in 1981. I mean, these are
incredible changes. That's right. I like your
opinion of these. Well, all for the better.
Everything was for the better. Now, let me tell you
my story about Earl Rudder again as president of
A&M. He went down there. Tom Harrington was still
president,
and he had the dual jobs.
And academically, Tom was probably qualified,
but administrative-wise, he was not. He taught me
fish chemistry. And so he was probably two, three
years older than I am. He was working on a doctor's
degree or something and teaching, you know. And he
stayed with them and made them a good hand. And he
got up to be eventually president and then
chancellor of the university, or his university
by then. No, it wasn't either. It was still
college. Because Earl supervised that change in
the name University, or college? College
University. He and I, in our living room over where
you were last night, talked about that very thing
before it ever, when he was proposing it, in his own
mind, building this direction. And what
motivated him to thinking in those terms, he told
me that when he went down there, A&M was getting
about $500,000 worth of national grants a year.
from big corporations, you know. It set up teacher
chairs and research chairs, research
laboratories and all this kind of thing. And
United Fruit Company was getting ready to set up a
tropical fruit disease laboratory in Nevada
School. Yeah.
He said, Grandma, I've been up there three times
now, and they won't even talk to me. They just tell
me they're not going to give any money to that
college. They give their money to universities.
And he said, I'll try to get in the back door. I'll
try to get in both side doors, and they won't even
open the front door for me. Talk to them. And I said,
well, hell, just change your name from college to
university. That's easy. All you got to do is write
an order. And he said, oh, that's not that simple.
And then we talked about this thing. He may have
thought about it, but I ventured the approach to
it. And, well, what's going to happen? I think it
took a legislature move. I said, well, I don't know
about the legislature. The first people you've
got to sell are the damn ex-students, because
there's no more vociferous crowd in the world than
A&M ex-students. And if you sell them on the
program, why, it'll be easy. If you don't sell them
on the program, they'll crucify you. And he said,
well, that's the damn sure truth. And so he set
about a sales campaign, if that's a good way to put
it, to the ex-students. And pointing out the fact
that he can't get an increase in the national
corporation grants
under the name of a college. And he needs that
money. The college needs that money.
And the students received it affirmatively. Then
he went about it down to the legislature. He still
had to sell the board of directors on it. Then the
legislature got the thing changed. And that to me
was a turning point of his direction of making,
turning A&M from a country college to a great
university. That was the first step.
Sometime in the latter years of his life, he told
me, you know how much grant we got last year?
Something over $15 million from $500,000.
Nothing in the world but changing the name from
college to university. Pretty new station here.
So he had a very far-reaching vision of making that
a great university. We talked about the
enrollment. We got 6,000 students down there when
he went over there, and now they got 36,000 or
something. And he said, you remember when you went
down there? Yeah. There weren't any girls around.
No, there sure weren't. The only girls I ever saw
were those laundry queens down there on the track
Saturday night. And he says, you know how many
students the university's got? No. But he quoted
it in the 15s of 20,000 or something like that.
University of Texas. University of Texas. And he
says, the only reason is because they've got girls
over there. I said, well, hell, that's easy. Just
accept girls. Well, we don't have the
dormitories. All the dormitories got urinals in
them instead of commodes. And just thinking loud
of all the problems you've got to contend with. And
ultimately, would it be worth it? And I assured him
it would be worth every bit of it. I know some of my
contemporaries have kids that went to university
because their girlfriend was going down to
university. Are their girlfriends going to SMU so
they want to go to SMU? They hate SMU with the guts,
but their girlfriend's going out there, so that's
where they're going to college. And that's a
change of philosophy among students today, that
they want to be in a
co-educational institution. And so he said about
the getting the board of directors to accept
girls. And when they did, their student body
started increasing on their straight up path.
Eight, 10,000 the second or third year to 12,
15,000 dollars, I mean 15,000 people to 20,000,
25,000 and so on. Nothing in the world has
accomplished that but co-educational education
down there. And Earl Rudder was the papa of that. I
discussed it with him. Whether I planned to see it
or whether he had it in his mind, I don't know and
don't care. But I know I did have a lot of discussion
with him on it before it ever happened. I said once
in this interview, sometimes he used me as a trial
balloon with ideas. And he knew that I would tell
him I got that's right or hell no, Earl, I wouldn't
touch you with a 10-foot pole. And a lot of times he
took, or it panned out that what I told him worked
out, and sometimes he didn't accept it. And that's
certainly his privilege. But Earl Rudder turned
that college around to being a great university,
set the stride for it to continue to be a great
university,
His untimely death, I hope, didn't lose stride
with it.
I know Dean Hubert, and I think he's a great teacher
and educator, but I don't know what his
administrator at Earl was. I don't think he is.
He's a great educator, but there again, Tom
Herrington was a great educator, but he wasn't an
administrator. He couldn't go down to the
legislation panel on the table and say, I've got to
have $10 million or $20 million, $100 million, and
get it. And Earl did. Now, what about those two
other very important changes, one allowing
blacks at A&M and the other ending the mandatory
Corps of Cadets? Would you address yourself to
those? Well, having blacks there is just as
inevitable
getting up in the morning and washing your face and
hands. So much of the funds come from federal
government. I don't know how much. If one dime
comes from federal government, they get to tell
you how to operate. And that's by Supreme Court
edict. That's the law of the land, and you've got to
like it. I don't have any idea how many blacks have
gotten down there,
I know there's not near as many racial-wise whites
at Prairie View as there are blacks at A&M. And I've
been to Prairie View where they're taking reviews
down there with him. I took their final review one
time down there. It was a thrill of my life. They've
got an outstanding Corps. And they're making lots
of good army officers for the Army. But anybody
that fights that battle is just completely off
base and not even in the ballpark, as far as I'm
concerned, because first, that's the law of the
land. And second, it's morally right that you give
those people the same advantage as I had. And what
they do is their business. And 99% of them, I guess,
frittered away. But that 1% will pay off someday. I
know they will. Now what about ending the Corps?
Well, I grew up in a different time. I think that
gets back to my philosophy on mandatory service to
our country. I think that everybody ought to be in
the Corps. Now whether that has enhanced or
increased the enrollment or not, Certainly they
couldn't have a core down there, and I have no idea
how many male or female students they have, but I
guess 8,000 of that 30,000 are female, and that
leaves 30,000 male, and you couldn't have a core of
30,000 people.
Financially and physically impossible. Have
they completely eliminated the core? I thought
they had the core. No. Volunteer, totally
volunteer. Yeah, greatly reduced. Every year
with the fish coming in, they ask people if they
want to join the Corps or not. And some do, and most
of them don't. They have about, I think it's 2,000
in the Corps out of 34,000. Yeah. Well, of course, I
went down there. Of course, they have female in the
Corps. Yeah. I went down there, and there are
different, age where I just couldn't wait to get
down there and be in the Corps. That was in my goals
of life from the time I was thinking about going to
high school and all through my high school of
junior ROTC. I
could pretty much have written
history of my life of getting into the Corps. And at
that time you either, if you went to A&M, you got in
the Corps.
Physical rejects were, still wore the uniform,
but they were, they were called something
So are you positive toward that move, then, to end
the mandatory core? How do you feel about it? I know
this must have been tougher, General Rutter. This
must have really been tougher, General Rutter.
I'm sure it was. But he could see that what he was
doing was right, but versus the fact that it built
the student body from 6,000 to 36,000. And you
can't argue with that success. So maybe the
Mandatory Corps is not the answer. To me, every
youngster, male or female, that comes of age of 18
or 19 or something, bang, ought to go into service
for two years or some adjustable time. I don't care
what it is. But they ought to prepare themselves
for the defense of our country. And we got to
talking about that thing. Is someplace for women
to serve their country just as well as the big place
in combat for men. I
think that every student, every youngster is
obligated to pay their, if there's another way to
put it, to pay their liability, their debt to our
society of a year or two service to qualify them for
that privilege of defending our country. I
owed it to my country to serve. I have never asked
for or received one dime of compensation for
having served my country. And I don't ask it. I have
never conceived of asking it. My country had been
good to me. It gave me an opportunity of an
education to serve it and now to make a good living
out of it. And that's what life's all about. On the
other hand,
I think everybody has that obligation. And I
strongly favor university military service at
some age, whether it's 17 to 19 or 18 20 or what it is.
Across the board, every man, if he can't do active
combat work, he can do the KP work, or he can do the
typewriter picking, or he can do the
administrative work, or he can do something. But
without exception, he should pay his,
if it's a good way to put it, his interest. toward
the indebtedness of protecting this country. But
of course, he's born with a, by virtue of being an
American citizen born here, he's got the finest
place in the world to live. And I humorously said to
two, three people, they asked me about what is the
finest thing I saw on our trip around the world. The
finest thing I saw was DFW when we hit there. Bar
none. There's just no place like it. And I've seen a
lot of the world now. So in other words, with every
single one of these major changes toward Texas
A&M, You agree with those changes, and you think
that they've improved this college to be a great
university? It's changed A&M from being a good
college to a great university. No question about
it. And it was the finest place to get an
engineering degree or an agriculture degree when
I went there. But it's a better place today because
of Earl Rudder. No question about it. Now we've
covered your early years, your education, what it
was like going to Texas A&M during the Depression,
and your military career and your reserve career.
I think we've covered, I'm out of questions. Do you
have anything else that you thought was
fundamental in your life or your career which you
think we should cover? Is there something I've
missed? No. You're the expert here. I'm not the
expert. I just thank God for my privilege of having
been able to attend A&M. And I know it made a better
man out of me. It equipped me to do the things I've
done in the Army and in my civilian pursuits. No
question about it. Had I not gone there, I'd never
have accomplished it.
I'm looking forward to our 50th reunion next year.
Sometime in May of 1952.
Good Lord
willing, the creeks don't get too high.
No, I have no inhibitions about singing. A&M made a
band out of me. It equipped me to do the things I did.
It gave me the confidence that I could do whatever I
wanted to. Sometimes my sights haven't been at the
tops, but I could have raised them. Maybe I was
complacent in having them set so high.
I don't know. But I'm a dedicated A&Mx student.
Yeah, I can see that.
It's a great university. It was a good school when I
was there, but it's a great university. Thanks a
lot for this interview, General. I really
appreciate your time. Well, the pleasure's mine.